Add gRPC client-side load balancing doc (#22348)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/grpc/loadbalancing.md

---
title: gRPC client-side load balancing
author: jamesnk
description: Learn how to make scalable, high-performance gRPC apps with client-side load balancing in .NET.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-3.0'
ms.author: jamesnk
ms.date: 05/18/2021
no-loc: [Home, Privacy, Kestrel, appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]
uid: grpc/loadbalancing
---
# gRPC client-side load balancing

By [James Newton-King](https://twitter.com/jamesnk)

gRPC client-side load balancing is a feature that allows gRPC clients to distribute load optimally across available servers. This article discusses how to configure a client-side load balancing to create scalable, high-performance gRPC apps in .NET.

> gRPC client-side load balancing requires [Grpc.Net.Client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Grpc.Net.Client) version XXXX or later.

Reviewer: Just marking so this doesn't get missed

    new DnsEndPoint("localhost", 81)
});

var services = new ServiceCollection();
services.AddSingleton<ResolverFactory>(factory);

var channel = GrpcChannel.ForAddress(
    "static:///my-example-host",
    new GrpcChannelOptions
    {
        ChannelCredentials = ChannelCredentials.Insecure,
        ServiceProvider = services.BuildServiceProvider()
    });
var client = new Greet.GreeterClient(channel);
```

The preceding code:

* Creates a `StaticResolverFactory`. This factory knows about two addresses: `localhost:80` and `localhost:81`.
* Registers the factory with dependency injection (DI).
* Configures the created channel with:
  * The address `static:///my-example-host`. The `static` scheme maps to `StaticResolver`.
  * Sets `GrpcChannelOptions.ServiceProvider` with the DI service provider.

This example creates a new <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.ServiceCollection> for DI. Suppose an app already has DI setup, like an ASP.NET Core website. In that case, types should be registered with the existing DI instance. `GrpcChannelOptions.ServiceProvider` is configured by getting an <xref:System.IServiceProvider> from DI.

## Configure load balancer

> A load balancer is specified in a service config using the `ServiceConfig.LoadBalancingConfigs` collection. Two load balancers are built-in and map to load balancer config names:

Author: service config is the right name for this

```csharp
var channel = GrpcChannel.ForAddress(
    "dns:///my-example-host",
    new GrpcChannelOptions
    {
        ChannelCredentials = ChannelCredentials.Insecure,
        ServiceConfig = new ServiceConfig { LoadBalancingConfigs = { new RoundRobinConfig() } }
    });
var client = new Greet.GreeterClient(channel);

var response = await client.SayHelloAsync(new HelloRequest { Name = "world" });
```

The preceding code:

* Specifies a `RoundRobinLoadBalancer` in the service config.
* Starts the gRPC call `SayHello`.
  * `DnsResolver` resolves addresses for the hostname `my-example-host`.
  * `RoundRobinLoadBalancer` attempts to connect to all resolved addresses.
  * gRPC calls are distributed evenly using round-robin logic.

## Write custom resolvers and load balancers

Client-side load balancing is extensible. It is possible to create a custom resolver by implementing `Resolver` to resolve addresses from a new data source. Or create a custom load balancer by implementing `LoadBalancer` with new load balancing behavior.

### Create a custom resolver

> A resolver is responsible for resolving the addresses a load balancer will use. It can also optionally provide a service config. A resolver implements `Resolver` and is created by a `ResolverFactory`. Create a custom resolver by implementing these types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A resolver:
* Is responsible for resolving the addresses a load balancer uses.
* Can optionally provide a service configuration.
* Implements `Resolver` and is created by a `ResolverFactory`. Create a custom resolver by implementing these types.
```

```csharp
public class FileResolver : Resolver
{
    private readonly Uri _address;
    private Action<ResolverResult> _listener;

    public ExampleResolver(Uri address)
    {
        _address = address;
    }

    public override async Task RefreshAsync(CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        // Load JSON from a file on disk and deserialize into endpoints.
        var jsonString = await File.ReadAllTextAsync(_address.LocalPath);
        var results = JsonSerializer.Deserialize<string[]>(jsonString);
        var addresses = results.Select(r => new DnsEndPoint(r, 80));

        // Pass the results back to the channel.
        _listener(ResolverResult.ForResult(addresses, serviceConfig: null));
    }

    public override void Start(Action<ResolverResult> listener)
    {
        _listener = listener;
    }
}

public class FileResolverFactory : ResolverFactory
{
    // Create a FileResolver when the URI has a 'file' scheme.
    public override string Name => "file";

    public override Resolver Create(Uri address, ResolverOptions options)
    {
        return new FileResolver(address);
    }
}
```

> The preceding code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the preceding code:
```

* `FileResolverFactory` implements `ResolverFactory`. It maps to the `file` scheme and creates `FileResolver` instances.
* `FileResolver` implements `Resolver`. In `RefreshAsync`:
  * The file URI is converted to a local path. For example, `file:///c:/addresses.json` becomes `c:\addresses.json`.
  * JSON is loaded from disk and converted into a collection of addresses.
  * Listener is called with results to let the channel know that addresses are available.

### Create a custom load balancer

> A load balancer implements `LoadBalancer` and is created by a `LoadBalancerFactory`. A load balancer is given addresses from a resolver and creates `Subchannel` instances. The load balancer tracks state about the connection and creates a `SubchannelPicker` that the channel will use to pick addresses when making gRPC calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A load balancer:

* Implements `LoadBalancer` and is created by a `LoadBalancerFactory`.
* Is given addresses from a resolver and creates `Subchannel` instances.
* Tracks state about the connection and creates a `SubchannelPicker` that the channel uses to pick addresses when making gRPC calls.
```

> `SubchannelsLoadBalancer` is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SubchannelsLoadBalancer` is:
```

        : base(controller, loggerFactory)
    {
    }

    protected override SubchannelPicker CreatePicker(List<Subchannel> readySubchannels)
    {
        return new RandomPicker(readySubchannels);
    }

    private class RandomPicker : SubchannelPicker
    {
        private readonly List<Subchannel> _subchannels;

        public RandomPicker(List<Subchannel> subchannels)
        {
            _subchannels = readySubchannels;
        }

        public override PickResult Pick(PickContext context)
        {
            // Pick a random subchannel.
            return _subchannels[Random.Shared.Next(0, _subchannels.Count)];
        }
    }
}

public class RandomBalancerFactory : LoadBalancerFactory
{
    private readonly ILoggerFactory _loggerFactory;

    // Create a RandomBalancer when the name is 'random'.
    public override string Name => "random";

    public RandomBalancerFactory(ILoggerFactory loggerFactory)
    {
        _loggerFactory = loggerFactory;
    }

    public override LoadBalancer Create(IChannelControlHelper controller, IDictionary<string, object> options)
    {
        return new RandomBalancer(controller, _loggerFactory);
    }
}
```

> The preceding code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the preceding code:
```

* `RandomBalancerFactory` implements `LoadBalancerFactory`. It maps to the `random` policy name and creates `RandomBalancer` instances.
* `RandomBalancer` implements `SubchannelsLoadBalancer`. It creates a `RandomPicker` that randomly picks a subchannel.

## Configure custom resolvers and load balancers

Custom resolvers and load balancers need to be registered with dependency injection (DI) when they are used. There are a couple of options:

> * If an app is already using DI, such as an ASP.NET Core website, they can be registered with the existing DI configuration. An <xref:System.IServiceProvider> can then be resolved from DI and passed to the channel using `GrpcChannelOptions.ServiceProvider`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If an app is already using DI, such as an ASP.NET Core web app, they can be registered with the existing DI configuration. An <xref:System.IServiceProvider> can be resolved from DI and passed to the channel using `GrpcChannelOptions.ServiceProvider`.
```

> * If an app isn't using DI then a <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.ServiceCollection> can be created, types registered with it, then create a service provider using <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.ServiceCollectionContainerBuilderExtensions.BuildServiceProvider*>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If an app isn't using DI then create:
  * A <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.ServiceCollection> with types registered with it.
  * A service provider using <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.ServiceCollectionContainerBuilderExtensions.BuildServiceProvider*>.
```

  * Channel address is `file:///c:/data/addresses.json`. The `file` scheme maps to `FileResolverFactory`.
  * Service config load balancer name is `random`. Maps to `RandomLoadBalancerFactory`.

## Why load balancing is important

HTTP/2 multiplexes multiple calls on a single TCP connection. If gRPC and HTTP/2 are used with a network load balancer (NLB), the connection is forwarded to a server, and all gRPC calls are sent to that one server. The other server instances on the NLB are idle.

Network load balancers are a common solution for load balancing because they are fast and lightweight. For example, Kubernetes by default uses a network load balancer to balance connections between pod instances. However, network load balancers are not effective at distributing load when used with gRPC and HTTP/2.

### Proxy or client-side load balancing?

gRPC and HTTP/2 can be effectively load balanced using either an application load balancer proxy or client-side load balancing. Both of these options allow individual gRPC calls to be distributed across available servers. Deciding between proxy and client-side load balancing is an architectural choice. There are pros and cons for each.

> * **Proxy** - gRPC calls are sent to the proxy, the proxy makes a load balancing decision, and the gRPC call is sent on to the final endpoint. The proxy is responsible for knowing about endpoints. Using a proxy adds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Proxy**: gRPC calls are sent to the proxy, the proxy makes a load balancing decision, and the gRPC call is sent on to the final endpoint. The proxy is responsible for knowing about endpoints. Using a proxy adds:
```

  * An additional network hop to gRPC calls.
  * Latency and consumes additional resources.
  * Proxy server must be setup and configured correctly.

> * **Client-side load balancing** - The gRPC client makes a load balancing decision when a gRPC call is started. The gRPC call is sent directly to the final endpoint. When using client-side load balancing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Client-side load balancing**: The gRPC client makes a load balancing decision when a gRPC call is started. The gRPC call is sent directly to the final endpoint. When using client-side load balancing:
```

>   * Client is responsible for knowing about available endpoints and making load balancing decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The client is responsible for knowing about available endpoints and making load balancing decisions.
```

>   * Additional client configuration required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Additional client configuration is required.
```

>   * High-performance, load balanced gRPC calls that eliminate the need for a proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * High-performance, load balanced gRPC calls eliminate the need for a proxy.
```

---
title: gRPC client-side load balancing
author: jamesnk
description: Learn how to make scalable, high-performance gRPC apps with client-side load balancing in .NET.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-3.0'
ms.author: jamesnk
ms.date: 05/18/2021

> no-loc: [Home, Privacy, Kestrel, appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no-loc: [Home, Privacy, Kestrel, appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR], "service config"
```

> no-loc: [Home, Privacy, Kestrel, appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR], "service config"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no-loc: [Home, Privacy, Kestrel, appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR, "service config"]
```

Reviewer 2: The meta data build errors such as with author, etc, look fine to me.  I'm am guessing that what has tripped up the metadata section might be related to listing "service config" outside of the no-loc brackets.

uid: grpc/loadbalancing
---
# gRPC client-side load balancing

By [James Newton-King](https://twitter.com/jamesnk)

Client-side load balancing is a feature that allows gRPC clients to distribute load optimally across available servers. This article discusses how to configure client-side load balancing to create scalable, high-performance gRPC apps in .NET.

Client-side load balancing requires:

* .NET 5 or later.

> !<-- TODO: Fix version -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: Fix version -->
```

---
title: Scalable apps with gRPC client-side load balancing
author: jamesnk
description: Learn how to make scalable, high-performance gRPC apps with client-side load balancing in .NET.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-3.0'
ms.author: jamesnk
ms.date: 05/18/2021
no-loc: [Home, Privacy, Kestrel, appsettings.json, "ASP.NET Core Identity", cookie, Cookie, Blazor, "Blazor Server", "Blazor WebAssembly", "Identity", "Let's Encrypt", Razor, SignalR]
uid: grpc/loadbalancing
---
# Scalable apps with gRPC client-side load balancing

By [James Newton-King](https://twitter.com/jamesnk)

> gRPC client-side load balancing is a feature that allows gRPC clients to distribute load optimally across available servers. This article discusses how to configure a client-side load balancing to create scalable, high-performance gRPC apps in .NET.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gRPC client-side load balancing is a feature that allows gRPC clients to distribute loads optimally across available servers. This article discusses how to configure a client-side load balancing to create scalable, high-performance gRPC apps in .NET.
```

Author: Hmmm, I'm not sure about this. "load" in this context doesn't seem pluralized in other blogposts and docs that I've read.

Reviewer: Revert. I wasn't sure about that. Best to be consistent. The wording is a bit clumsy.

Reviewer: I agree, reverted

gRPC client-side load balancing requires [Grpc.Net.Client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Grpc.Net.Client) version XXXX or later.

## Why load balancing is important

> HTTP/2 multiplexes multiple calls on a single TCP connection. If gRPC and HTTP/2 are used with a network load balancer, the connection is forwarded to a server and then all gRPC calls are sent to that one server. The other server instances the network load balancer is supposed to distribute load to are idle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP/2 multiplexes multiple calls on a single TCP connection. If gRPC and HTTP/2 are used with a network load balancer (NLB), the connection is forwarded to a server and all gRPC calls are sent to that one server. The other server instances on the NLB are idle.
```

Reviewer: Do you want to start using NLB and NLBs? I'm fine either way.

> Network load balancers are a common solution for load balancing because they are fast and lightweight. For example, Kubernetes will use a network load balancer to balance connections between pod instances by default. However, network load balancers are not effective at distributing load when used with gRPC and HTTP/2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Network load balancers are a common solution for load balancing because they are fast and lightweight. For example, Kubernetes by default uses  a network load balancer to balance connections between pod instances. However, network load balancers are not effective at distributing load when used with gRPC and HTTP/2.
```

## Proxy or client-side load balancing?

gRPC and HTTP/2 can be effectively load balanced using either an application load balancer proxy or client-side load balancing. Both of these options allow individual gRPC calls to be distributed across available servers. Deciding between proxy and client-side load balancing is an architectural choice. There are pros and cons for each.

> * **Proxy** - gRPC calls are sent to the proxy, the proxy makes a load balancing decision, and the gRPC call is sent on to the final endpoint. The proxy is responsible for knowing about endpoints. Using a proxy will add an additional network hop to gRPC calls. This will add latency and consume additional resources.

Reviewer: Do you want to say something about routing to the least loaded server  can be more more performant, even with the additional network hop and overhead?

Author: Both client-side load balancing and proxy load balancing can do that. It isn't worth mentioning in a comparison.

> * **Proxy** - gRPC calls are sent to the proxy, the proxy makes a load balancing decision, and the gRPC call is sent on to the final endpoint. The proxy is responsible for knowing about endpoints. Using a proxy will add an additional network hop to gRPC calls. This will add latency and consume additional resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Proxy** - gRPC calls are sent to the proxy, the proxy makes a load balancing decision, and the gRPC call is sent on to the final endpoint. The proxy is responsible for knowing about endpoints. Using a proxy adds:

 * An additional network hop to gRPC calls.
 * Latency and consumes additional resources.
```

Reviewer: Or something like:
Using a proxy:

 * Adds an additional network hop to gRPC calls.
 * Adds latency and consumes additional resources.
 * Can increase performance under high load conditions.

> * **Client-side load balancing** - The gRPC client will make a load balancing decision when a gRPC call is started. The gRPC call is sent directly to the final endpoint. In this model, the client is responsible for knowing about available endpoints. Client-side load balancing is a high-performance solution that eliminates the need for a proxy and additional network hops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Client-side load balancing** - The gRPC client makes a load balancing decision when a gRPC call is started. The gRPC call is sent directly to the final endpoint. In this model, the client is responsible for knowing about available endpoints. Client-side load balancing is a high-performance solution that eliminates the need for a proxy and additional network hops.
```

What's the downside? Complexity? endpoint discovery?

## Configure gRPC client-side load balancing

> Client-side load balancing is configured when a channel is created. The two components to consider when using load balancing are the address resolver, which will resolver the addresses; and the load balancer, which will pick which address should be used for a gRPC call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client-side load balancing is configured when a channel is created. The two components to consider when using load balancing:

* The address resolver, which resolvers the addresses.
* The load balancer, which picks the address that should be used for a gRPC call.
```

> The address resolver is configured using the scheme of the address URI. For example, a `dns` scheme maps to `DnsAddressResolver`. This resolver will get the Internet Protocol (IP) addresses for the specified address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The address resolver is configured using the scheme of the address URI. For example, a `dns` scheme maps to `DnsAddressResolver`. This resolver gets the Internet Protocol (IP) addresses for the specified address.
```

```csharp
var channel = GrpcChannel.ForAddress(
    "dns://backend.default.svc.cluster.local",
    new GrpcChannelOptions { ChannelCredentials = ChannelCredentials.Insecure });
var client = new Greet.GreeterClient(channel);

var response = await client.SayHelloAsync(new HelloRequest { Name = "world" });
```

The preceding code:

* Configures the created channel with the address `dns://backend.default.svc.cluster.local`. The `dns` schema maps to `DnsAddressResolver`.

> * Doesn't specify a load balancer. The channel will default to `PickFirstLoadBalancer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Doesn't specify a load balancer. The channel defaults to `PickFirstLoadBalancer`.
```

* Starts the gRPC call `SayHello`.

>   * `DnsAddressResolver` will resolve IP addresses for the host name `backend.default.svc.cluster.local`. The result is cached and periodically refreshed. The host name value will depend upon your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `DnsAddressResolver` resolves IP addresses for the host name `backend.default.svc.cluster.local`. The result is cached and periodically refreshed. The host name value depends upon the environment.
```

>   * `PickFirstLoadBalancer` will attempt to connect to one of the resolved IP addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `PickFirstLoadBalancer` attempts to connect to one of the resolved IP addresses.
```

>   * The call will be sent to the first IP address the channel successfully connects to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The call is sent to the first IP address the channel successfully connects to.
```

> A load balancer is specified in the service config. If no service config or load balancer is specified then the channel will default to `PickFirstLoadBalancer`. Another load balancer implementation that is included is `RoundRobinLoadBalancer`. This load balancer will attempt to connect to all IP addresses returned by the address resolver. The load balancer then distributes load across all IP addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A load balancer is specified in the service configuration. If no service configuration or load balancer is specified, the channel defaults to `PickFirstLoadBalancer`. Another load balancer implementation that is included is `RoundRobinLoadBalancer`. The `RoundRobinLoadBalancer` attempts to connect to all IP addresses returned by the address resolver. The load balancer then distributes load across all IP addresses.
```

```csharp
var channel = GrpcChannel.ForAddress(
    "dns://custom-hostname",
    new GrpcChannelOptions
    {
        ChannelCredentials = ChannelCredentials.Insecure,
        ServiceConfig = new ServiceConfig { LoadBalancingConfigs = { new RoundRobinConfig() } }
    });
var client = new Greet.GreeterClient(channel);

var response = await client.SayHelloAsync(new HelloRequest { Name = "world" });
```

The preceding code:

> * Specifies a round robin load balancer in the service config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Specifies a round robin load balancer in the service configuration.
```

Author: "service config" is an actual gRPC name for the referred collection of settings. I'd like to leave it as is.

* Starts the gRPC call `SayHello`.

>   * `RoundRobinLoadBalancer` will attempt to connect to all resolved addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `RoundRobinLoadBalancer` attempts to connect to all resolved addresses.
```

>   * gRPC calls are distributed evenly using round-robin logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * gRPC calls are distributed evenly using [round-robin](https://www.nginx.com/resources/glossary/round-robin-load-balancing/) logic.
```

## AddressResolver and LoadBalancer

gRPC client-side load balancing has two extension points: `AddressResolver` and `LoadBalancer`. Some implementations are built into gRPC for .NET.

* `AddressResolver` - Base type for resolving addresses for the client. An address resolver is selected using the address scheme.
  

>   * `DnsAddressResolver` - Resolve addresses from a DNS host name. DNS host names are updated in the background every 5 seconds. DNS resolution is commonly used to load balance over pod instances that have a [Kubernetes headless services](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `DnsAddressResolver` - Resolves addresses from a DNS host name. DNS host names are updated in the background every 5 seconds. DNS resolution is commonly used to load balance over pod instances that have a [Kubernetes headless services](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services).
```

>   * `StaticAddressResolver` - Resolve addresses from a static collection that is specified when the resolver is created. Useful if the addresses aren't dynamic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `StaticAddressResolver` - Resolves addresses from a static collection that is specified when the resolver is created. Useful if the addresses aren't dynamic.
```

> * `LoadBalancer` - Base type for picking from the available addresses. A load balancer is configured in the service config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `LoadBalancer` - Base type for picking from the available addresses. A load balancer is configured in the service configuration.
```

>   * `PickFirstLoadBalancer` - Iterate through the addresses and attempting to connect to them. The first successful connection will always be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `PickFirstLoadBalancer` - Iterates through the addresses and attempts to connect to them. The first successful connection is always used.
```
